Add tutorial on how to a migrate ROS 2 package that uses Gazebo Classic (#425)
gazebosim/docs: migrating_gazebo_classic_ros2_packages.md

that directly get loaded by Gazebo Classic and run as part of the simulation to
provide an interface between ROS and Gazebo Classic. On the other hand, the
primary mode `ros_gz` is used as bridge between ROS and gz-transport topics.
Knowing these conceptual differences is important in making the transition.

**Note:** Since the name of the project has gone through two major changes, we
highly recommend you read the [history](https://gazebosim.org/about) of the
project to have a better understanding of the terminology used in this tutorial
and elsewhere.

This tutorial will show how to migrate an existing ROS 2 package that uses the
`gazebo_ros_pkgs` package to the new `ros_gz`. We will use the
[turtlebot3_simulations](https://github.com/ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3_simulations/)
package as an example. The complete, migrated version of
`turtlebot3_simulations` covered in this tutorial, can be found in
[this fork](https://github.com/azeey/turtlebot3_simulations/tree/new_gazebo)

We'll start by following the
[PC Setup](https://emanual.robotis.com/docs/en/platform/turtlebot3/quick-start/)
guide to install the necessary prerequisites for simulating Turtlebot3. This

> will install additional packages, such as Nav2 and Cartopgrapher, which we will

Reviewer: links to nav2 and Cartographer
```suggestion
will install additional packages, such as Nav2 and Cartographer, which we will
```

1. Edit launch files that start Gazebo (e.g. `empty_world.launch.py`)
1. Update the world SDFormat file.
1. Edit launch files that spawn models.
1. Edit model SDFormat files.
1. Bridge ROS topics.

## Update package dependencies

The package depends on `gazebo_ros_pkgs`, which is the package that provides
launch files, plugins, and other utilities for using Gazebo classic with ROS 2.
The equivalent for the new Gazebo is `ros_gz`, but `ros_gz` is actually a
meta-package that contains a few packages. It's okay to replace
`gazebo_ros_pkgs` with `ros_gz` here, but using just the subset of packages
needed for your project will reduce the number of dependencies. For the
`turtlebot3_simulation` package, we will only need `ros_gz_bridge` and
`ros_gz_sim` for now. `ros_gz_bridge` provides a topic bridge between Gazebo and
ROS while `ros_gz_sim` provides launch files and other utilities that help with
starting Gazebo and spawning models.

After making the change, lines 17-21 of `package.xml` will look like this:

```xml
...
  <buildtool_depend>ament_cmake</buildtool_depend>
  <depend>ros_gz_bridge</depend>
  <depend>ros_gz_sim</depend>
  <depend>geometry_msgs</depend>

>   <depend>nav_msgs</depend>

Reviewer: alphabetize

Author: Done in https://github.com/gazebosim/docs/pull/425/commits/90742e17a59476027637e42bde91d1ef25755b38

...
```

> 

Author: I'll use permalinks here so it stays valid even if the master branch is updated upstream.

After making the change, we'll need to install the new dependencies. This should
install the necessary Gazebo version.

```bash
rosdep install --from-paths . -i -y
```

This tutorial assumes you are using Gazebo Fortress as it is the version of
Gazebo officially paired with ROS 2 Humble. It is possible to use newer versions
of Gazebo, but might require extra work. See
[Installing Gazebo with ROS](https://gazebosim.org/docs/latest/ros_installation)
to learn more. However, if you intend to switch back and forth between the new
Gazebo and Gazebo Classic, it's best to use Gazebo Fortress since the newer
versions will automatically uninstall Gazebo Classic. With that being said, the
concepts covered by the tutorial should work with newer versions of ROS 2 and
Gazebo.

## Launch the world

> We now need to edit `trutlebot3_gazebo/empty_world.launch.py` and replace any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We now need to edit `turtlebot3_gazebo/empty_world.launch.py` and replace any
```

Author: https://github.com/gazebosim/docs/pull/425/commits/90742e17a59476027637e42bde91d1ef25755b38

in the world SDFormat file. The next step is to fix that.

**Note:** Due to a bug in the GUI client, there might be a lingering
`ign gazebo -g` or `gz sim -g` process after terminating the launch. You can
kill it using `pkill -f -9 'ign gazebo'`

## Edit world SDFormat file

The file we will be editing is `turtlebot3_gazebo/worlds/empty_world.world`.
This file references the models `sun` and `ground_plane`. In Gazebo Classic,
these models were either shipped with the simulator or downloaded from the
gazebo [model repository](https://github.com/osrf/gazebo_models). The new Gazebo
does not ship these models, instead we can use models from Fuel or add the
models directly to the world file.

To use fuel models, replace the `include` tags for `sun` and `ground_place` with

```xml
<include>
  <uri>
    https://fuel.gazebosim.org/1.0/OpenRobotics/models/Ground Plane
  </uri>
</include>

<include>
  <uri>
    https://fuel.gazebosim.org/1.0/OpenRobotics/models/Sun
  </uri>
</include>
```

Relaunching `empty_world.launch.py` should now start the simulator successfully.

## Spawn model

In this step, we will modify

> `turtlebot3_gazebo/launch/spawn_turtlebot3.launch.py`. Again, we need to change

Author: You have to use the `humble-devel` branch: https://github.com/ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3_simulations/blob/humble-devel/turtlebot3_gazebo/launch/spawn_turtlebot3.launch.py. The `master` branch looks like it's ROS 1.

`gazebo_ros` to `ros_gz_sim`. We'll also need to change `spawn_entity.py` to
`create`, which is the node in `ros_gz_sim` that provides model spawning
functionality. From the argument list, `-entity` needs to be replaced with
`-name`. You can run `ros2 run ros_gz_sim create --helpshort` to see more
options.

The resulting `Node` should look like:

```python
start_gazebo_ros_spawner_cmd = Node(
    package='ros_gz_sim',
    executable='create',
    arguments=[
        '-name', TURTLEBOT3_MODEL,
        '-file', urdf_path,
        '-x', x_pose,
        '-y', y_pose,
        '-z', '0.01'
    ],
    output='screen',
)
```

If you uncomment `ld.add_action(spawn_turtlebot_cmd)` in `empty_world.launch.py`
and run the launch file, you'll notice errors related to unrecognized plugins.
These are coming from the model SDFormat file, which we will modify next.

## Modify the model

We will be using the `waffle` robot for this tutorial, so we'll edit the file
`turtlebot3_gazebo/models/turtlebot3_waffle/model.sdf`. The changes we need to
make are mostly related to plugins and their parameters.

> ### libgazebo_ros_imu_sensor.so

Author: Yeah, I can see the confusion. It looks like the SDF file in the `master` branch doesn't have any `<plugin>` tags. If you look at https://github.com/ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3_simulations/blob/humble-devel/turtlebot3_gazebo/models/turtlebot3_waffle/model.sdf instead, I think things will make more sense. I'll add a sentence to outline the steps before listing the plugins.

the `gz_frame_id` parameter in `<sensor>`. Lastly, we'll set the `<topic>`
parameter similar to the IMU sensor. The final `<sensor>` tag for the Lidar
should look like:

```xml
<sensor name="hls_lfcd_lds" type="gpu_lidar">
  <always_on>true</always_on>
  <visualize>true</visualize>
  <pose>-0.064 0 0.121 0 0 0</pose>
  <update_rate>5</update_rate>
  <topic>scan</topic>
  <gz_frame_id>base_scan</gz_frame_id>
  <lidar>
    ... <!-- same content as <ray> in the original -->
  </lidar>
</sensor>
```

### libgazebo_ros_camera.so

Remove plugin, set `<topic>` if desired.

- TODO: need to check camera info

### libgazebo_ros_diff_drive.so

Since this is a model specific plugin, we will replace it with the `DiffDrive`
plugin. We will match the parameters of `libgazebo_ros_diff_drive` as much as
possible, but exact match may not be possible. For example, the original plugin
has a `max_wheel_acceleration`, but `gz-sim-diff-drive-system` has
`max_linear_acceleration` instead, which are not equivalent; the latter is a
limit on the whole vehicle's linear acceleration. We can approximate the value
by multiplying the wheel acceleration limit by the radius of the wheel. Refer to
the

> [DiffDrive class reference](https://gazebosim.org/api/gazebo/6/classignition_1_1gazebo_1_1systems_1_1DiffDrive.html)

Reviewer: Tutorial is in the harmonic folder 
```suggestion
[DiffDrive class reference](https://gazebosim.org/api/sim/8/classgz_1_1sim_1_1systems_1_1DiffDrive.html)
```

Author: The tutorial is actually not in the harmonic folder. I started it there, but moved it before I pushed. I forgot to remove it from the harmonic/index.yaml though. 

Since this tutorial is targeting `humble`, I thought it would be best to link to Fortress documentation, but maybe I should link to both?

  <wheel_radius>0.033</wheel_radius> <!-- computed from <wheel_diameter> in the original plugin-->

  <!-- limits -->
  <max_linear_acceleration>0.033</max_linear_acceleration> <!-- computed from <max_linear_acceleration> in the original plugin-->

  <topic>cmd_vel</topic> <!-- from <commant_topic> -->

  <odom_topic>odom</odom_topic> <!-- from <odometry_topic> -->
  <frame_id>odom</frame_id> <!-- from <odometry_frame> -->
  <child_frame_id>base_footprint</child_frame_id> <!-- from <robot_base_frame> -->
  <odom_publisher_frequency>30</odom_publisher_frequency> <!-- from <update_rate>-->

  <tf_topic>/tf</tf_topic> <!-- Short topic name for tf output -->

</plugin>

```

The `<wheel_torque>` parameter can be realized by setting effort limits on each
`<joint>`. For example:

```xml

<joint name="wheel_right_joint" type="revolute">
  <parent>base_link</parent>
  <child>wheel_right_link</child>
  <pose>0.0 -0.144 0.023 -1.57 0 0</pose>
  <axis>
    <xyz>0 0 1</xyz>
    <limit>
      <effort>20</effort> <!-- from <wheel_torque> in libgazebo_ros_diff_drive.so.-->
    </limit>
  </axis>
</joint>
```

### libgazebo_ros_joint_state_publisher.so

We will replace this plugin as well with

> [`JointStatePublisher`](https://gazebosim.org/api/gazebo/6/classignition_1_1gazebo_1_1systems_1_1JointStatePublisher.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`JointStatePublisher`](https://gazebosim.org/api/sim/8/classgz_1_1sim_1_1systems_1_1JointStatePublisher.html).
```

The parameters are mostly similar, however, the `<update_rate>` parameter is not
supported. Here's the full `<plugin>` tag with comments describing the mapping
from the original plugin.

```xml
<plugin filename="gz-sim-joint-state-publisher-system"
  name="gz::sim::systems::JointStatePublisher">

>   <topic>joint_states</topic> <!--from <ros><remaping> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <topic>joint_states</topic> <!--from <ros><remapping> -->
```

Author: https://github.com/gazebosim/docs/pull/425/commits/90742e17a59476027637e42bde91d1ef25755b38

  <joint_name>wheel_left_joint</joint_name>
  <joint_name>wheel_right_joint</joint_name>
</plugin>
```

### World plugins

As mentioned earlier, sensors are handled by generic world level plugins. By
default, if there are no world plugins specified, Gazebo adds the `Physics`,
`SceneBroadcaster`, and `UserCommands` plugins by default. However, if we
specify any plugins at all, Gazebo will assume we want to override the defaults,
so will not add any default plugins. Therefore, we have to add the additional
plugins for IMU and Lidar sensors as well as the ones that would have been added
by default. We will once again edit `turtlebot3_gazebo/worlds/empty_world.world`

> add the following right after `<world name="default">`.

Reviewer 2: I understand this behavior, but we may want  to emphasize this section as it is a bit counter intuitive.

Author: What do you think about this:

![image](https://github.com/gazebosim/docs/assets/206116/b0ae8a0f-89c0-406b-9cfe-04e3362328fb)

```xml
<plugin
  filename="gz-sim-physics-system"
  name="gz::sim::systems::Physics">
</plugin>
<plugin
  filename="gz-sim-user-commands-system"
  name="gz::sim::systems::UserCommands">
</plugin>
<plugin
  filename="gz-sim-scene-broadcaster-system"
  name="gz::sim::systems::SceneBroadcaster">
</plugin>
<plugin
  filename="gz-sim-sensors-system"
  name="gz::sim::systems::Sensors">
  <render_engine>ogre2</render_engine>
</plugin>
<plugin
  filename="gz-sim-imu-system"
  name="gz::sim::systems::Imu">
</plugin>
```

## Bridge ROS topics

> The plugins in `gazebo_ros_pkgs` are Gazebo plugins that are also ROS nodes. In

Reviewer 2: Can we reword this just a little bit to make it clearer? I can't make suggestions on multi-line text, but I would make it clear Gazebo Classic, when using gazebo_ros_pkgs uses a ROS node per plugin while New Gazebo working with ros_gz bridges individual topics. Currently we refer to just gazebo_ros_pkgs and ros_gz, and while that's correct it makes the reader have to map between those package and old and new Gazebo.

Author: Reworded in e39cabe74c089f5ada56de62f660c73ac203263a

contrast, interfacing with ROS in `ros_gz` is mainly done through topic bridges.
The bridge node is a generic node that bridges topics between `gz-transport` and
ROS 2.

> To create the bridge, we first create a `yaml` file that contains the topic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create the bridge, we'll use a `yaml` file that contains the topic
```

Reviewer 2: The use of create here threw me off a bit, hopefully this reads more like an explanation followed by specific directions.

Author: Okay, changed in e39cabe74c089f5ada56de62f660c73ac203263a

  direction: GZ_TO_ROS

# gz topic published by JointState plugin
- ros_topic_name: "joint_states"
  gz_topic_name: "joint_states"
  ros_type_name: "sensor_msgs/msg/JointState"
  gz_type_name: "gz.msgs.Model"
  direction: GZ_TO_ROS

# gz topic published by DiffDrive plugin
- ros_topic_name: "odom"
  gz_topic_name: "odom"
  ros_type_name: "nav_msgs/msg/Odometry"
  gz_type_name: "gz.msgs.Odometry"
  direction: GZ_TO_ROS

# gz topic published by DiffDrive plugin
- ros_topic_name: "tf"
  gz_topic_name: "tf"
  ros_type_name: "tf2_msgs/msg/TFMessage"
  gz_type_name: "gz.msgs.Pose_V"
  direction: GZ_TO_ROS

# gz topic subscribed to by DiffDrive plugin
- ros_topic_name: "cmd_vel"
  gz_topic_name: "cmd_vel"
  ros_type_name: "geometry_msgs/msg/Twist"
  gz_type_name: "gz.msgs.Twist"
  direction: ROS_TO_GZ

# gz topic published by IMU plugin
- ros_topic_name: "imu"
  gz_topic_name: "imu"
  ros_type_name: "sensor_msgs/msg/Imu"
  gz_type_name: "gz.msgs.IMU"
  direction: GZ_TO_ROS

# gz topic published by Sensors plugin
- ros_topic_name: "scan"
  gz_topic_name: "scan"
  ros_type_name: "sensor_msgs/msg/LaserScan"
  gz_type_name: "gz.msgs.LaserScan"
  direction: GZ_TO_ROS
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[The completed yaml file can be found here. ](https://github.com/azeey/turtlebot3_simulations/blob/new_gazebo/turtlebot3_gazebo/params/turtlebot3_waffle_bridge.yaml)
```

> Each topic has ROS and Gazebo topic names, types and a direction which indicates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each entry in the yaml file has a ROS topic name, a Gazebo topic name, a ROS data/message type, and a direction which indicates
```

> which way messages flow. We will need to update the `CMakeLists.txt` file to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which way messages flow. We will need to update the [`CMakeLists.txt`](https://github.com/azeey/turtlebot3_simulations/blob/ccb2385fd478e79c898d290d80fa41f35b1bbb83/turtlebot3_gazebo/CMakeLists.txt#L72) file to
```

install the new `params` directory we created. The CMake `install` command
should look like

```cmake
install(DIRECTORY launch models params rviz urdf worlds
  DESTINATION share/${PROJECT_NAME}/
)
```

> Finally, we will edit `turtlebot3_gazebo/launch/spawn_turtlebot3.launch.py`, to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, we will edit [`turtlebot3_gazebo/launch/spawn_turtlebot3.launch.py`](https://github.com/azeey/turtlebot3_simulations/blob/new_gazebo/turtlebot3_gazebo/launch/spawn_turtlebot3.launch.py), to
```

# Migrating ROS 2 packages that use Gazebo Classic

The Gazebo simulator has its roots in the Gazebo Classic project, but it has a
few significant differences that affect how a ROS 2 project uses the simulator.

> One difference is that ROS 2 projects now use the `ros_gz` package instead of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One difference is that ROS 2 projects now use the [ros_gz](https://github.com/gazebosim/ros_gz) package instead of
```

> `gazebo_ros_pkgs` as the source of launch files and other useful utilities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[gazebo_ros_pkgs](https://github.com/ros-simulation/gazebo_ros_pkgs) as the source of launch files and other useful utilities.
```

> Another major difference is that `gazebo_ros_pkgs` provided a set of plugins
> that directly get loaded by Gazebo Classic and run as part of the simulation to
> provide an interface between ROS and Gazebo Classic. On the other hand, the
> primary mode `ros_gz` is used as bridge between ROS and gz-transport topics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another major difference is that while [gazebo_ros_pkgs](https://github.com/ros-simulation/gazebo_ros_pkgs) provided a set of plugins
that directly get loaded by Gazebo Classic and run as part of the simulation to
provide an interface between ROS and Gazebo Classic,
[ros_gz](https://github.com/gazebosim/ros_gz) does not provide plugins but is used as bridge between ROS and gz-transport topics.
```

Author: In light of https://github.com/gazebosim/ros_gz/issues/490, I want to avoid saying `ros_gz` doesn't provide plugins.

Author: Reworded in 5547582b4d81e105ef572cd6969d0fc76ed2f941. What do you think?

important in making the transition.

**Note:** Since the name of the project has gone through two major changes, we
highly recommend you read the [history](https://gazebosim.org/about) of the
project to have a better understanding of the terminology used in this tutorial
and elsewhere. As a convention we refer to older versions of Gazebo, those with
release numbers like Gazebo 9 and Gazebo 11 as "Gazebo Classic." Newer versions
of Gazebo, formerly called "Ignition", with lettered releases names like
Harmonic, are referred to as just "Gazebo" in this document. This tutorial will
show how to migrate an existing ROS 2 package that uses the `gazebo_ros_pkgs`
package to the new `ros_gz`. We will use the
[turtlebot3_simulations](https://github.com/ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3_simulations/)
package as an example. The complete, migrated version of
`turtlebot3_simulations` covered in this tutorial, can be found in
[this fork](https://github.com/azeey/turtlebot3_simulations/tree/new_gazebo).

We'll start by following the
[PC Setup](https://emanual.robotis.com/docs/en/platform/turtlebot3/quick-start/)
guide to install the necessary prerequisites for simulating Turtlebot3. This

> will install additional packages, such as Nav2 and Cartographer, which we will

Reviewer: links to nav2 and Cartograoher Github ?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/gazebosim/docs/pull/425/commits/9ec0798398db9d15922b57bcb41407cbce45159b. I realized the tutorial doesn't actually use these as this sentence promises, so I added a small section in https://github.com/gazebosim/docs/pull/425/commits/5b655cf6103676e428f3e3d0a3bbb7f65e36f693
